It's the 30th of July, 2020, and workers
have started digging a huge hole right
outside Parliament in the Canadian
capital. Well, when we say digging,
that date marked the launch of an
extraordinary construction project now
taking place underneath the most
important building in the entire
country. Another blast quickly followed,
then another, and 3 years later, the
result was this. A gigantic pit with
Canada's answer to Big Ben looming over
the precipice. It's all happening now
because the future of the nation's most
prized asset is on the line. A building
that's overseen the last century of this
nation's growth. And this mammoth
excavation has only just begun.
If we asked you to name the top three
Canadian cities, what would you go for?
Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver would
probably feature. They do have the
biggest populations by metropolitan
area. But don't forget Ottawa. After
all, it is the capital city and has been
since the country was founded in the
1800s. Queen Victoria chose it for its
position near the border of Ontario and
Quebec. It's where the English and
French-speaking regions meet. And
because it was surrounded by forests,
meaning it could be more easily defended
in case of any aggression from the
United States, as if that would ever
happen.
>> We're spending hundreds of billions a
year to protect it. Our military is at
their disposal. They should be a state.
>> To cement their newfound federal status,
Canada needed somewhere to house their
parliaments. They decided to put it here
on a hill overlooking the Ottawa River.
It would consist of three separate
buildings or blocks arranged around a
large lawn with the biggest in the
middle. This center block was to be the
home of the House of Commons and the
Senate Chambers along with offices for
MPs, ceremonial spaces, and a library.
Construction began in 1859 and was
finished 17 years later, but it was to
have a relatively short life. In 1916,
the building burnt down in a huge fire,
the true cause of which remains a
mystery. Only the Library of Parliament
survived. A new center block was quickly
commissioned. Finished in 1927, this one
lasted a lot longer. In fact, it's still
standing today. Like the original, it
was built in the Gothic Revival style
with gargoyles, grotesques, and freezes
adorning the exterior. But it wasn't
just a simple replica. The Peace Tower
was built to commemorate those who died
in the First World War and was 70%
taller than its predecessor with 53
bells inside, it's just a few meters
shorter than London's Big Ben. Don't try
and beat us at parliamentary buildings,
guys. Stick to the hockey.
And yet, while the building might have
remained intact, over the last century,
it has deteriorated pretty heavily.
Well, when surveyors inspected it, they
found eroded concrete supports, water
infiltration in several areas, and some
of the structural steel beginning to
rust and break down. It's also now seen
as vulnerable to threats that must not
have been seen as a big problem back in
the 20s. The structure has no earthquake
protection, and before you ask, yes,
Canada does get some earthquakes.
They're usually small, but there have
been a few over magnitude 7 in the past.
Another one of those anywhere near
Ottawa could be catastrophic for a
building like this made from more than
24 types of stone. Then there's the fact
that it lacks the sort of ultra high
security you'd expect from a site of
this importance. And despite attracting
more than 3 million visitors to
Parliament Hill every year, there isn't
a great deal for them to do or see. And
it can get overcrowded.
which is why the center block is now
midway through a $5 billion upgrade
that'll see it not just fully renovated,
but also structurally reinforced. It's
being led by Public Services and
Procurement Canada and is the largest
and most complex project of its kind in
the country's history. You only need to
gaze out across that front lawn to see
the scale of what's happening because
half of it gone. In its place, for the
time being, is a 23 meter deep pit
stretching across the entire length of
the building. To make it, explosives
were used to cut through the bedrock
with 40,000 truckloads needed to carry
the material away. Blasting began in
2020 and didn't complete until 2023. So,
what on earth is all that for? Well,
it's to create room for a massive
underground welcome center. More on that
in a bit. By the start of 2025, concrete
is being poured for the parts of the new
center that have to go in first, such as
walls, stairs, and elevator shafts. But
the most complicated part of the
excavation work is yet to come. The
welcome center has to extend underneath
the main building, which currently has
no basement levels at all. They've
decided to add some in now, more than
100red years after the building was
first constructed. At the same time, a
base isolation system is now going to be
installed to give the building
earthquake protection. To do this, the
entire center block must be separated
from its foundation. Now,
understandably, that ain't simple.
Before any major excavation is done, the
center block has to be fully supported.
What they're doing is placing it all on
temporary posts before the building is
then put on top of a new structural grid
of steel and reinforced concrete. Around
800 piles are being driven into the
ground, grouped together with steel
bracing to create columns. Workers will
then excavate downwards in between these
columns. And after that, the basement
levels will begin to rise from the
bottom up. Then it's time for those base
isolators, more than 500 of them.
They're going to sit in between the
bottom of the building and the new
foundation. Their job is effectively to
separate the building from the planet it
sits on. They act as giant shock
absorbers in an earthquake. Although
base isolators are not new, we've seen
them fitted under nuclear fusion
reactors and huge telescopes. This is
the first time they've been installed in
this way. It's an enormous engineering
feat, but far from the only big
challenge that workers on this sites are
having to face. Specialists were called
in to secure the four pinnacles around
the top of the peace tower while they
awaited repair. They did this by running
large straps from the base of the
flagpole and wrapping them around each
pinnacle to hold them steady. And that
meant abs sailing across the clock
faces. It's important because we know
what can happen when a damaged clock
tower pinnacle isn't fixed.
Don't worry, we're not going to show you
the rest because it's horrible. And this
only happens in small English villages.
Back to Otawa. And while those brave
fellas were hanging out at the top of
the tower, they also fitted monitors
used to measure vibration during
construction. Around 500 of these have
been placed right across the site
because a rehabilitation project that
ends up doing more damage than it fixes
wouldn't be great. Meanwhile, further
below, another team is having to restore
the stones that make up the exterior,
all 365,000
of them. If you thought cleaning your
patio was timeconuming, then this is a
whole other level. But thankfully, they
have more than just a pressure washer at
their disposal.
Lasers. Yes, really. This team is armed
with tools that use focused high energy
light to vaporize surface deposits,
clearing away dirt while leaving the
stonework unscathed. Inside Centerblock,
the building's been stripped right back
to its structural elements, and efforts
to restore and preserve over 20,000
heritage assets are underway. 50 rooms
are being refurbished, some containing
unique and irreplaceable works of art.
And around 250 stained glass windows are
also getting a muchneeded touch-up. Then
there's the decorative arts team who've
been making their way across the
building from east to west. They're
examining the hundreds of sculptures
that can be found almost everywhere you
look, repairing any that have been
harmed by years of erosion and
weathering.
So, there's an incredible amount of work
going on here. From heavy drilling and
reinforcement down to the most detailed
artistry, but you might be wondering
where the people who are normally here
have got to. The MPs, senators, and
other high-ranking individuals who are
more likely to wear suits than
construction hive vests. Well, they've
had to move out for now. While all this
is going on, the House of Commons has
relocated to the West Block, and the
Senate is working out of, well, the
Senate of Canada building, which kind of
makes sense. And there's a while to go
until they can come back. This project
is set to complete in 2031, and the
center block won't fully reopen for
another year after that. When Mark
Connie and his colleagues are finally
let back in, they and the public will be
able to admire the stunning new welcome
center in all its glory. Visitors and
parliamentarians will enter under a new
raised pathway outside the main
building. After passing through a secure
screening area, they'll come to the main
hall with the foundation of the peace
tower forming part of the main design.
They'll be able to see the top of it,
too, through the skylights that cover
the new space, filling the hall with
light with connections to the west and
east blocks. The center is going to act
as a secure accessible front door to
Parliament. As for the center block
itself, Canadians are going to be handed
back a treasure that has been both
restored and fully modernized, ready for
another century of service.
It's obvious why historic buildings need
to be maintained. But it's not often
that you see a restoration project go to
the lengths of what we're currently
seeing unfold in Ottawa. This isn't just
about patching up a crumbling icon. It's
a chance to ensure it can withstand
whatever the future holds.
If you enjoyed this video and you want
to get more from the definitive video
channel for construction, make sure you
subscribe to the B1M.